---
layout: post
title: "There is a War Going on For Your Mind"
---

Depending on who you are, the title of this post may have you thinking of
either a [Flobots song](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oNvszlC8UFk) or of
Alex Jones' "news" website, Infowars. It turns out that both are relevant to
this conversation.

The number of false stories that are popping on my Facebook feed has been
bothering me. Especially since that often they are getting shared by people
who I thought would have no problem discerning truth from falsehood. Most of
the talk of "fake news" in our current political climate places the blame on
those who produce dubious stories. Certainly they do deserve to be blamed,
since they present attention grabbing misinformation to either profit by
drawing users onto pages replete with ads or to alter public opinion (see
Russian election meddling). However, not enough blame is put on us, the
consumers of media.

False or misleading information has existed on the Web since its origin, but
in those early days it was typically confined to small networks of
conspiracy theory sites and message boards. There was no means of spreading
disinformation quickly. Now in the current era of the Web, social media has
given fake news and other falsities a conduit to propagate relentlessly. A
key difference between social media and other traditional media forms is
that we are not only consumers of it, but also producers and distributors.
Writing a Facebook post gives me the ability to distribute my unfiltered
thoughts to my 600 or so "friends" immediately, with nearly zero effort. For
the most part, I think this is okay. If I post some zany opinion of mine,
people will understand that it is just my opinion and that I am not an
expert in say, health care policy or criminal justice reform. Yet when it
comes to sharing external content, the problem of differentiating facts from
opinions and falsehoods gets a lot harder.

Why is this the case? For one, fake news articles are masterfully crafted to
deceive. For example, a recent false article stated that millions of pounds
of rat meat was being sold on the US market. The body of the article
mentioned reports that the United States Food and Drug Administration was
looking into the issue. It also mentions that law enforcement had seized
several illegal containers of rat meat inbound from China. First, name
dropping a government agency lends credibility to the article even despite
the lack of quotes from any agency official or public statements on the
matter. While the article does not specify the source of the reports it
references, the word "report" certainly has a genuine sounding ring to it.
Lastly, the article plays off of a fairly common American stereotype that
shoddy, often seedy goods come from China.

In addition to the deceptiveness, our own internal urges drive us to believe
and share fake news. Every human has a desire to be important. Some of us
find our sense of importance through charitable work, others through robbing
banks.  We all want to feel important. When we see an attention grabbing
headline, we want to be the ones to inform, enlighten, or warn our friends.
We want to fuel our sense of importance.

Finally, our sense of what is credible is skewed. We were taught in school
that reliable information comes from published work but too often we
conflate an article being on the Web with being a reliable published work.
Putting text onto the Web is cheap: I'm doing it right now and I'm paying
zero dollars to do so. Certainly, my schools tried to teach us how to spot a
credible website. My school librarian taught us some tenets to follow to
avoid shady information online, but looking back some of those tenets seem
dubious. One tenet, for example, was to look for the .org domain (which
literally anyone can register for $20 USD). Even if we were taught in school
how to determine credible websites, there is still the issue that we do
obtain much of our information online. I personally only subscribe to one
print subscription. The rest of my news, I get online. And that is great.
Publications like the New York Times, Washington Post, and Wall Street
Journal have great information on their websites. However, we get used to
the familiar look and feel of news websites, and end up falling into the
trap of subconcsiously giving too much credibility to sites that have a similar facade. I
give a lot of credit for the success of fake news sites to their front-end
developers.

How can we combat the rise of fake news? I think the biggest step is to
first acknowledge that we are easily swayed. Everyone wants to believe that
their opinions are their own, but that is just not true. Every time you
consume some sort of media, your mind is swayed in some direction. And that
is not necessarily a bad thing. What else is education other than slowly
molding your mind?
